[Music]
okay now I add you as co-host
Peter yes can you hear me now
yes yes I'm I'm using my phone to uh
transmit the voice and but I need to use
my computer to start the
presentation so hopefully it's going to
work
and so can I start the presentation
now yes
definitely
yes yes please now we can hear you and
everything okay perfect I will try
to
[Music]
um good so can you see my presentation
now
yes
yes okay good
so yes so my presentation is about
adherence to Convention on the right of
people with disabilities in Che
psychiatric
hospitals and uh I would start with the
institutionalization and its
motives and as I'm sure you know one of
the main motives for psychiatric de
institutionalization was uh non
adherence to Human Rights and this was
depicted famously in in a book and then
in a movie called One Flew Over the gole
nest and uh we have uh seen many reports
linking violations of human rights to uh
psychotic
institutionalization uh as I said uh
Human Rights was one of the motives but
also the invention of effective
psychopharmacology uh and the belief of
the government that uh carrying the
community is going to be cheaper than
the caring psychic hospital all the
streo thieves were the main drivers of
De institutionalization which started in
and then was successfully pursued in
many po industrial countries but not in
Central and Eastern Europe and this was
because of the ideological reason uh
because communist
societies uh according to the
ideology didn't have officially any
social problem and if there were social
problems there were rues of capitalism
which going to diminish spontaneously
with the progress of Communism so what
did practically meant and what was one
of the negative consequences was that if
there were social problems there uh were
uh try to be hidden by the communist
government so there were uh ghettos for
Ras created uh but there were also
people with mental health problems
hidden in psychiatric hospitals so uh
communist government didn't have uh this
uh motivation to the institutionalize
mental care system
and even after the revolution in 1989 to
1991 and the Devolution of the former
Soviet Union um so even 25 years after
the disolution of the former Soviet
Union uh the de
institutionalization
effort um has not um started very very
much they were not Beed by governments
at least um such a reform was initiated
did in the Czech Republic and it was one
of the first countries in the region
which uh came up with a strategy of
Mental Health Care reform which was
backed by Ministry of Health and by
government until that time uh in the
whole Center and Eastern Europe the
reforms were usually initiated by some
enthusiasts and uh and some NOS but not
they were not backed by government so we
were one of the first countries which
actually backed the mental health care
reform by government minister of Health
published the strategy of mental
healthare reform and it said that uh the
main aim uh of the uh reform is to
ensure that the human rights of people
with mental health problems are
respected in all possible
aspects and
uh so one of the activities that we did
uh to implement the mental health care
reform was that he used the polic rights
toolkit which is a tool that enables to
measure adherence to
crpd uh which is an United Nation
document promoting protecting and
ensuring the full and equal enurement of
all human rights and fundamental Freedom
by all persons with disabilities and
promoting respect for the inherent
dignities and this Tool uh is taking
this uh and operationalize it into an
toolkit which then enables to assess
different
institutions and measure to what extent
they adhere to the
crpd so one of the activities that we
did with in C that we um yes one one
second that yeah we don't not see the
slides
moving no you don't see the slides new
no it yeah to morphy so probably instead
of full screen if this is the you you
know how to full screen morphy can you
tell him how you fix it because it also
happened to him
before uh it is better can you see my
slides moving
now now yeah now yeah okay
good uh so sorry for that we are we are
here and
uh uh
I said that one of the activities that
we did within the M car reform that was
to assess psychatric hospitals in the
Czech Republic with this PO right tool
kits that I just
described and uh there are 25 psychic
hospitals in the Czech Republic there
are three for, adolescent
population three separate for
addictions one for organic mental
problems and 15 psychos hospitals for
primarily for people with severe mental
illnesses out of these 18 ptic hospitals
are public and 16 of them are run by
Ministry of Health and Ministry of
Health of the Czech Republic uh two are
Regional um and we did a pilot
evaluation of the psychatric hospitals
of two the psychiatric hospitals when we
took one small psychic hospital and one
large psychic hospital and we assessed
that it's the viral C right to kit in
2017 and then we follow up up we
followed up on that and we invited all
hospitals uh to participate in
additional uh
assessment um which took place in
2018 so uh out of all invited
hospitals um 16 participated in 2018 and
we had one evoluation that we took from
2017 17 so basically I'm going to speak
about results for 17 out of 21 psychic
hospitals that are in the Czech
Republic the toet as I already mentioned
um uh is composed to
um address the articles that are in the
crpd um you have four possible scores um
the worst is that achievement
the specific theme or criteria was not
initiated uh and then the other great is
that achievement was somehow
initiated then achieved partially and
achieved fully where there is a full
adherence to uh the
crpd you have also not applicable
because in some cases uh you can the
Criterion uh in in the given
context uh all teams there are five
basic teams uh in quality rights toolkit
and all of these teams are divided into
several standards and each standard is
divided into several criteria and these
criteria are scored first they are very
specifically
operationalized and then uh we go to the
uh standard and then to the
teams and what I'm going to present
actually is is just results for uh
um for not for individual criteria but
for standards and for teams we had
evaluation team uh that assessed the
psychiatric hospital each team uh had a
five members there was a psychiatrist
social worker there was a human rights
lawyer uh and there was thoder and
researcher and uh there were a couple of
these team but each team included uh uh
these
professions all of the members of the
evaluation team they trained by wh in
using the instrument the quality right
to it and it was a workshop which took
two days and U and that was that was
designed uh to train the team how to
score how to read the interviews how to
avoid conflict Onin how to keep
confidentiality
Etc um then uh there were
visits into psychc
hospitals
um uh and uh these teams they do
observation they do analysis of document
they do interviews with service users
with their relatives uh with they do
interviews with staff management they do
interviews with Health and Social care
Personnel but also with technical
personal so basically everyone who is
present in psychic hospital no matter
what the position uh the people are they
got interviewed and the aim is to have
all of these groups present in the
interviews so the complex picture can be
given and then evaluation of these
interviews uh is done through consensus
uh and if no consensus is made then
there is a voting but it's basically
last result all the time the effort is
to arrive to a
consensus um uh I will present the data
anonymously so I won't mention any
specific psychic hospitals uh I will use
a graphic design to uh Char the
results and
uh I will I will use five charts for
each of the team separately and then one
chart for the global results and I'm not
going to use these 25 charts for each of
the fundles because that would be too
long so let's go to the theme one which
is the right to an adequate standard of
living and then
uh I will guide you through the colors
because now you're going to see six uh
charts which are very uh similar and uh
where you see colors uh the best result
is in green it's in it's achieved in
full so for instance the building in is
in good physical condition that's one of
the uh standard that was assessed that
compos of another Criterion which I'm
not going to present because that will
be too much detail but what you see is
that uh only in about um
20% uh the buildings of SAR hles are in
good conditions and in more than 10% uh
the buildings are in a really pool
conditions so but the worst uh results
are for the CR for the standard 1.2
which is the sleeping conditions of
service users are comfortable and allow
sufficient privacy you see that in none
of the hospital this was achieved in
full and in only slightly more than
20% the achievement was uh was
partial uh also uh very poor results for
uh the standard 1.5 which is servage
users can communicate freely and their
right to privacy
respected and also po results in terms
of the uh standard 1.6 which is the
facility provide a welcoming comfortable
stimulating environment conducive to
active participation and
interaction uh in this Criterion in many
cases uh the achievement was not even
initiated um I spoke already about the
Criterion
1.1 uh in the team two which is the
right of right to enurement of the
highest attainable standard of physical
health uh you see that the results are
much better than in the previous section
uh in many cases uh these standards were
achieved fully or
partially with the exception of the uh
standard
2.3 uh which relates to the care which
is provided in line with user recovery
plan and that's what we found out that
the recovery plans are often not part of
the Care in psychic Hospital in the
Czech Republic and I'm referring to the
year 2017 and 2018 when this assessment
took place so it's five years
back um then the other theme which looks
into the right to exercise legal
capacity and the right to personal
Liberty um
as well the results here are better than
in the team ones but uh especially in
the standard 3.1 which is Serv uses
preferences regarding the place and form
of treatment are always a
priority um the results out by
pool
um and uh and in many cases this has not
been even initiated in
hospitals um then Team Four which is
freedom from torture cure inhuman or
degrading
treatment um or or punishment and from
exploitation violence and
abuse
um uh again the results are better than
in the team one but still you see some
standards which are quite poor
especially uh the standard 4.2 which
speaks about alternative methods uh in
place of seclusion and Spain as means of
Des escalating deescalation of potential
crisis then finally the team Fes have
achieved the right to live independently
and be included in the community and uh
again uh as in the Team One the results
here are very poor uh you see that uh
especially in the uh standard 5.2 5.3
and 5.4
uh which is service users can access
education and employment
opportunities the right of service users
to participate in political and public
life and to exercise freedom of
Association is supported and service
users are supported in taking part in
Social cultur religious and leisure
activities
respectfully uh are quite
poor uh and uh um the achievement in
these uh
standards uh is rarely full across
psychiatric hospitals in the Czech
Republic uh this is the final chart
which basically summarize what I what I
said uh um couple of minutes ago which
is uh that the poorest result uh are in
the theme one which is the right to an
adequate standard of living U or the
Article 28 of the
crpd and in the theme five which is the
rights to its independent be included in
the community which is an Article 19 of
the
CRP okay
now yes these are the two now what what
what that all means
uh uh if you followed carefully what I
said uh you could make uh and clear
conclusion that in most of the cases the
nonadherence to the Convention of Rights
of people with
disabilities in check psychiat aspect is
an outcome of low investments in
Psychiatry it's an uh it's theer is
caused by inappropriate physical
conditions you know a lack of privacy uh
not a good place for Sleep uh very bad
sleeping conditions um very
inappropriate rooms etc etc and and the
other part is called by under suff that
there is simply too many patients in
psychi hos for two little
Personnel um this is this is especially
concerning because what we can
see uh in data why why is situation like
this in in Czech Republic of course
because of these historical reasons that
I mentioned in the beginning uh that
dnation has not started even during the
community them and 25 years after that
in the Czech
Republic uh but also and this is
something that we see across the
countries across the globe and that is
the fact that the burden of mental ill n
and the share of the global burden of
mental illnesses on the overall burden
of all
diseases uh far surpasses the allocation
of Health budgets to Mental Health
Services um in the Czech Republic for
instance uh the share of mental
illnesses on the overall burden of all
illnesses according to the global burden
of disease study uh is about
16% and only 4% of the health budgets
goes to mental health serves actually so
this is a huge structured discrimination
of people with mental mes and I argue
that this results in human rights
violation
um I have been involved in many
anti-stigma programs and anti-ma
campaigns and I myself uh have been
leading the national anti- stigma
program for about seven years
now and
uh I'm I'm thinking
whether uh this effort to decrease
stigmatization in in the society is
really the most effective way how to
improve the conditions of people with
mental health problems and I'm thinking
whether uh you know um it would be it
could be more efficient to Simply go to
the court in Strasburg and and say hey U
this is a clear human rights violation
if if a countries ACR the European Union
uh invest only a fraction of what should
be invested in um
Psychiatry uh given its Pro its share on
the overall bargain
of of
illnesses um so that that that the main
point uh I think that U this is more
political neglect of Psychiatry that
leads to human rights
violations and um and I think it's a
it's one of the uh most uh concerning
problem in the M car system across
Europe
currently um my last point is that uh
the assessment that I just presented was
done in 2017 and 2018 and fortunately
since that time the situation has
improved quite a lot uh we have launched
many trainings in psychatric hospitals
uh for stuff and uh and there was a lot
of work done uh within the mental Caron
so the situation has
improved uh but uh it do not improve
much in terms of investment and in order
to achieve much better results we would
need much higher investments into into
mental healthare
system so thank you for listening I will
stop uh sharing my screen now and I will
get back to on Google
meet so hopefully we can hear each
other thank you so much
Peter yes thank you
anik so I hope that was comprehensible
and I'm ready to pick some questions or
comments if there are
any sorry if you if you explain that the
statistics are by Center by region or is
the entire population of the patients
like there is a only fraction that it's
in the no seclusion they are already
achieving that it is by Center it is how
it's how it's cluster that that
number like you are you have achieved
that for a specific kind of users or you
have achieved that already in some
centers and
regions yeah well uh that was for 17 out
of 21 psychatric hospitals that are in
the country and we usually focused on
Departments of psychiatric hospitals
which uh focus on people with C mental
illnesses such as uh schizophrenia or
personality disorders or or any other
psychotic uh
disorders
and we have about 9,000 BS in all these
psychics hospitals Al
together if if nobody ask anything else
at the moment how would you invest if
you had the resources that you would
like
to what what the question what I would
do if I would have enough
resources exactly
yeah yeah well uh
definitely um I would initiate a change
in the system which is currently still
institutionalized uh I would invest into
uh Flats rather than psychotic
Department of psychatric
hospitals um so to make it sure that uh
only a very small fraction of people who
really need long-term in patient
psychiatric care get it because this is
not currently the situation and people
end up in hospitals uh because there is
lack of services in the community and
lack of Housing and lack of specialized
Mental Health Care teams so I would
invest in those to make it sure
that we avoid all unnecessary
institutionalization uh that's that's
the other study that we did and uh that
showed that in psychic hospitals there
are still people hospitalized for 10 20
even 30 years so for many people uh
especially back in time um basically the
diagnosis of schizophrenia in many cases
especially when they were from
socioeconomically Advantage background
uh the diagnosis of schizophrenia was
basically a life sentance in psychic
hospital and that's that's something
that uh we still unfortunately see that
there are people hospitalized for
decades just because they don't have
elsewhere to
go I'm I'm wondering if the in terms of
Elsewhere to go are there there programs
in the Czech Republic such is soia house
or other kind of residential
Alternatives um that that are
available alternative models to the
mainam that
are yeah not not soia model or model
like this but uh we have some we have
Community Mental Health themes and
commital services and uh uh most often
they they have uh some accommodation
capacities as well so they work within
the regions within the within the towns
and within the cities and they usually
have some accommodation capacity which
they are able to use so then people with
uh severe mental health problems can uh
benefit from those and they can get
both accommodation and Supportive
Services by specialized Community Mental
Health Centers
yeah pet Peter um you may have said this
you may have answered this question but
can people be involuntarily committed to
hospitals in Czechoslovakia can they in
the Czech Republic can can they be uh in
basically hospitalized against their
will or treated against their
will yes they can uh if they are
potentially dangerous to themselves or
to people around them and uh this is
quite a problem uh because it's it's the
court who decides about this and so we
have a Cas of uh you know I I can recall
a case of a 16 years old boy who got his
uh first episode of
psychosis and during which he was
violent to people around him uh he got
secluded by court but also he got um
proper
treatment and he uh is stabilized for
now about two years he didn't have any
other episode of psychosis but because
the court was too slow to decide about
um basically cancellation of these uh um
of this of of this seclusion then this
boy is still in ptic hospital uh so he
basically
uh is functioning very well uh he is no
longer for two years dangerous to
himself or to people around him um but
he's still in psychic hospital because
court has not been able to decide
otherwise for these two years and
obviously this person is missing his
education for two years and he is also
in a unit where are people who are uh
you know really dangerous so this is
clearly
very bad for his development so there
are still cases like this and it's
a but I what I argue is that it's not a
fault of individual it's a it's a fault
of the system
actually uh yeah are there are there
organizations who are
um uh trying to change other uh private
non profit organizations trying to
change things trying to
um you know influence legislators
influence the government etc etc to
um to not allow for that kind of
thing yes there are um and
occasionally uh this is taken to
mainstream
media uh which forces politicians to say
something about it and to make some
promises
uh but the development is is really slow
I would say or it depends on the
perspective right like uh from vne point
of view uh if you take what is
realistically possible to uh change in
couple of years when the whole system
has been neglected for more than half a
century then you can argue that the
progress is quite significant and
quick but from the perspective of
service user or or this boy that I you
know just describe it case obviously
it's it's too
slow um so it depends on the on the
perspective but yet and within the
mental healthare reform one of the
biggest achievements that that I'm proud
of is that we have uh been able to
support service users
organization when they inform started uh
it was not usual that a service user
would participate in decision making in
service provision Etc and there was only
one or two Services organizations across
the country which were not functioning
very well nowadays no decision is taken
without people with LIF experience to be
present uh care is usually provided also
by people with less experience so there
is a peer workers in psychic hospitals
in community mental centers and in other
services and the number of organizations
uh has risen dramatically and there is
even an umbrella of Services of
organizations so this the progress in
this is is there but um but it's very
difficult uh in terms of um Shifting the
ways how the health budget is spent
because that based on tradition you know
and I would definitely argue that um it
should reflect the burden of diseases
right uh so if the burden of mental
health illnesses is about
16% that about 16% from the health
budget should go to mental health but
it's only
four% and to shift this is very
difficult because then you have
to um face the opposition from all other
Healthcare
professions because you would need to
take the money from somewhere else and
then obviously you know when it comes to
leukemia when it comes
to all kinds of cancers when it comes to
uh other problems these
are much stronger in terms of uh public
opinion and in terms of uh political
influence so so that's very difficult
even if there are these organizations
and individuals that are speaking for
the rights of people with mental
problems yeah
thanks
welcome
pet how hard is to make the case of the
need for this to to stop resources from
beinging whistic socially if the problem
is not attended
properly if the person is there the
situation gets worse or not improves
that not only in the health system but
it causes more trouble and it's also
human capital that is lost if you want
to wish look it like that but it is
really a problem that is not well
attended
soly how hard it is to not self present
it as it is that there is an to fulfi is
not taking money from tuberculosis or
any of any other speciality it should be
something
that needs to be attended because
otherwise have consequences for the
society yes hard it is to
that well that that's extremely hard and
one of the approach that has been taken
is uh and one of the hypothesis is that
if we that this is because of stigma
right so there is a hypothesis that this
structureal discrimination is caused by
stigma that people with mental health
problems are stigmatized a Psychiatry as
a field is also stigmatized within the
medicine and that this structure
discrimination is a result of
stigmatization so the assumption is if
you decrease stigma this is going to
change but uh I'm no longer very much
believing in this um and I think that
more maybe direct action is needed and
uh I really think that uh it might
be far more quicker and efficient to
take this into
um the court for human rights in
starbook and say hey this is simply not
acceptable for government uh to continue
in this uh disproportionate financing of
mental health because that leads to
human rights
violation this is wonderful coming from
you I mean that that court for human
rights in Strasburg is that under the
United Nations what organization is that
under it's a it's a European Union Court
that's a
European yes am I
right we need one of those in North
America yeah
it's a European part of Human Rights
uhuh
yeah I'm not sure if it has taken Al
International cases at in some points
but it's
a let me double check but I do believe
that for war crimes in other countries
sometimes it has taken cases in
any in any circumstance what you are
doing is your own go government from
your position of authority in mental
health saying you need to address this
and it is not on me it is on you because
you are not offering me the resources I
need to do it properly this is wonderful
Peter
may I ask and what are the prospects of
this going going forward and how to
initiate
it how do sorry send it
again I I know for other networks in
Europe that there has been cases that
have been brought there and some
countries have lost cases in that
court I don't not I don't not know what
are the consequences if really they
have achieved what they wish
to yeah
yeah
well I'm not I'm yeah well usually when
there is a decision by European court
for human rights
uh that um are usually taken seriously
by by individual countries but the thing
is that uh this is uh usually decision
uh in terms of individual
cases uh so it's individuals who human
rights were
violated and then there might be some
penalty for the
countries uh Etc but it's usually um in
the individual cases it's not on this
system thematic level so I don't know
any decision that would be on such a um
um systematic level and what would be
the results of that I'm familiar just
with individual
cases so yeah I'll just to to confirm
the European Court of human rights have
taken like Uganda genocide these kind of
things I'm not saying that it's gonna be
easy if you try to push anything related
to mental health here but H for a
colleag of in Norway there have been
cases of people being tied in a in a bed
for too long these kind of things they
have won cases
yet
yeah or this makes me think that you
know even if it's difficult to actually
take a case to these courts as as I you
know I'll suggest might even more
difficult in North am Amica because I'm
not even sure what venue that would be
maybe just you know there could just be
a lawsuit but um but given the activism
that I mentioned in my talk that several
activists involved in isps were able to
get um a patient who was given forc
ECT uh we were able to get the the
hospital to relent from that from from
writing to politicians in their District
you know and as I mentioned I I I
invoked the UN
report that lists ECT and voluntary ECT
as a form of torture you know so if even
if it can be hard to go to court you can
always use the court you know and public
you know public de declarations like
that to to you know at least I don't
know embarrass and shame
people into doing things differently
perhaps yes I agree with this yes
completely
Peter can can we ask can I ask about the
situation in Ukraine you have work on
that right if it's something that we
cannot talk about because it's but are
they meaning Russia yeah using
Psychiatry
games uh well that that I'm not very
much familiar with I'm I'm involved more
in helping uh Ukrainian War refugees in
in the CCH Republic in terms of their
mental health and also we have couple of
projects in Ukraine but but in this
topic of uh um Soviet style
Psychiatry uh I would recommend to speak
to Robert Fen he's really the best
expert in in the area and um yeah I I
don't know that much about that
that's another situation the refugees
crisis that also needs a proper
resources
to well there is a huge trauma to to
heal and there is a need to do it yeah
it's
a what was the name of the individual
you mentioned who worked on Soviet
Psychiatry Robert it's Robert F Boran I
will I will write it to CH to chat okay
great he has published a lot on that so
you can just uh you can just uh Google
this work oh okay great yeah I know I
know I've come across you know work on
Soviet psychiatry in the past I don't
remember who but it makes me curious
about psychiatry in Russia Today you
know I'm I'm wondering under the
current system of power you know how may
have been used or abused is and whether
it's used to to punish political
dissidents or or anything like that
maybe
not oh yeah this is still a problem and
uh and Robert actually published a book
on this recently on the current
political abuse of theat in Russia
that's a that's a long uh history uh you
know all this concept that was
discovered of sluggy schizophrenia etc
etc how to basically persecute the
political um
opponent and and let them down into
hospitals um
interestingly uh you know we were part
of the uh world that was L to the east
uh from the former iron cartons so we
belong to the sphere of influence of the
uh Soviet Russia and but the but the
Psychiatry was used in other way around
it was used not to persecute political
opponents but to protect them so
basically when people were persecuted by
the state uh usually uh
psychiatrist hided them in hid them in
in hospitals in order to avoid the
police persecution so there were many
disident working or being uh um
hospitalized in psychotic hospitals and
the
hospitalization was that you know they
were
organizing uh movie clubs they were
organizing culture programs there they
were you know writing their books etc
etc and it was kind of a shelter so it
was other way around in former
Czechoslovakia most
often that's interesting very
interesting to learn
yeah
Peter I forgot to to tell you that we
are recording this if it's okay with you
we are going to publish and I was gonna
ask you now if you have any book to
recommend to learn about the history of
the Czech Republic using mental health
to protect this then this is going to be
so interesting to add in the references
in the video because it's really a topic
that I had no idea and it's it's I guess
that many people doesn't know that this
is this happened it's it's really really
beautiful yeah well many countries
already are using the quality right tool
kit actually to assess their psychotic
institutions with uh with that
instrument so I know that Lithuania had
initiated M careform and they
assess Psychiatric Hospital there and um
I I think that ftic hospitals in Finland
were assessed with the instrument as
well um
so that's that's a quite
influential uh instrument and it's
really good because it it
operationalized the um human right in a
in a way which is very
specific so and so it enables to you
know measure the change and and come up
with some really practical Solutions
um and sometimes it's it's just a matter
of uh Habit you know so for instance we
found out that in one of the psychc
hospitals patients were not allowed to
have their mobile phes we like asking
why why is that and the answer was
because we have been doing this like
this for the whole time but this is not
the reason you know so why would you not
allow people have their mobile phone and
then they come up with all the potential
risks that might be involved such as how
they would be able to call they dealers
for
instance so so we had a couple of
workshops with them and then we agree
that we will try to you know change the
practice and have some kind of pil of
period when people will be allowed to
have their mobile phones of course this
was to a benefit of the patients but
also to the personnel because then you
know people didn't ask them with so many
questions such as can I call my mother
can I call my friend can I use the phone
to do this and that so in the end you
know it's been good for
both patients and
stuff so this is this is a very nice
instrument I would definitely recommend
using this um regularly especially in
cases when you see that some facilities
do not here sufficiently to
crpd thank you
again thank you very
much thank you for invitation for nice
discussion and wish you success with the
whole
symposium thank you so
much thank you bye-bye
goodbye